---
view::extends: _includes.blog_post_base
view::yields: post_body
post::title: Coming up in laravel 5.3
post::brief: laravel 5.3 is scheduled to be released in June 2016 based on a proposed release schedule, this post is a list of all the things you can expect in this release.
pageTitle: Coming up in laravel 5.3
---
@yield('post::brief')

# Implicit controller routes have been removed
Using `Route::controller` is no longer available in 5.3, the reasons for that change are stated in [Pull Request #10777](https://github.com/laravel/framework/pull/10777), here's part of it:

> This method has quite a lot of issues and also makes routes definitions confusing as they are not directly referenced in routes file. This sometimes may lead to unexpected route definitions (e. g. if method like getFilesystem is added to parent or trait - developer mistake, but may be unnoticed).

It's more likely that this method will be available as a package, so it's up to you to decide if you're going to keep using it or switch to using explicit route definitions, however if you decided to switch it's better to start now.

# The Query Builder returns a collection
As of 5.3, the query builder `get()` method will return an `Illuminate\Support\Collection` instead of an array. The Pros of such change, as listed by the PR creator, are:

1. Makes it consistent with Eloquent. You'll find countless questions on StackOverflow asking why some collection method can't be called on a query builder result.
2. It's just much cleaner than this: collect(DB::table('posts')->get()). Laravel prides itself on making all these tiny interactions more enjoyable. This should not be any different.
3. Native PHP arrays are just useless.

So if you're expecting an array out of `DB::get()` anywhere in your application or tests you'll need to update your calls to be `DB::get()->all()` instead.

# Removed functions
- `Str::randomBytes` and `Str::equals` are removed in favour of the native PHP methods `random_bytes()` and `hash_equals()`.
- The `lists()` method is also removed from ELoquent Builder, Query Builder, and Collections. You may use the `pluck()` method directly.
- `array_build()` helper is also removed from the framework as it's no longer used anywhere in the core.
- Model's `withHidden()` method is removed in favour of `makeVisible()`, same goes for Eloquent Collection's `withHidden()`. So in order for you to make certain fields visible after defining them as hidden using the Model's `hidden` property, you'll need to use `makeVisible()`.
- The `Collection::whereLoose()` method was removed since `Collection::where()` now supports operators. [See here](collection-where-operators).

# New validate() method in Validator
The new method will throw a `ValidationException` if the Validations fails, here are the different ways you can use this method:

Using the Validation factory:

```php
$validator = Validator::make($data, $rules);

$validator->validate();
```

Or on the Validator directly:

```php
Validator::validate($data, $rules);
```

Or using the helper method:

```php
validator($data, $rules)->validate();
```

<a name="collection-where-operators"></a>
# Collection::where() accepts operators
In laravel 5.3 you're able to filter a collection using `where()` via operators, and also a major change is that the method performs a loose comparison when not given any operators:

```php
$collection = collect([['score' => '3'], ['score' => 3]]);

// Loose comparison by default
$collection->where('score', 3);
// returns [['score' => '3'], ['score' => 3]]

$collection->where('score', '=', 3);
$collection->where('score', '==', 3);
// returns [['score' => '3'], ['score' => 3]]

$collection->where('score', '===', 3);
// returns [['score' => 3]]
```

Here's a list of all the operators you can use:

`=` `==` `===` `<=` `>=` `<` `>` `<>` `!=` `!==`

With these operators available, the `whereLoose()` method was **removed** from the collection class as it's not needed anymore.

# Minimum PHP version
In 5.3 the framework only supports php 5.6, php 7.0, and hhvm.